# Social Justice Blog: Mapping Priority Neighborhoods for Environmental Justice in Richmond, CA
In today’s blog post we will look at steps made by the Environmental Justice Atlas project to provide scholars, local communities, and governments a useful environmental violence and justice mapping resource. We’ll discuss how the resource could be improved as well and how our own future project that focuses on mapping environmental Justice for Richmond could build upon the goals of the former resource to provide more in-depth information at local levels.

# Environmental Justice Atlas

# Description and Background
The Environmental Justice Atlas is a worldwide map that plots points with different icons indicating different types/instances of environmental conflict. Each icon when clicked opens a brief description contextualizing the conflict either by a former form of environmental violence, existing infrastructure, disputes, etc. Unfortunately, the map lacks a key with a complete list of all the icons and the respective types of environmental conflict they represent. Observing the map, I can identify the following icon types: industrial and utilities conflicts, nuclear, infrastructure and built environment, fossil fuels and climate justice/energy, biomass and land conflicts, water management, mineral ores and building materials extraction, etc. The icons make it clear the project focuses on both current environmental conflicts and historical ones. The data of these points can be both spatial and date specific. All these points are overlayed on a low-resolution Mercator projection map typical on Google maps and 2000s-era primary education textbooks. The project aims to intervene with the global community at large as a reference for the world’s scientists, journalists, teachers, and activists regarding this topic. Thus, its social intervention is aimed at reaching the largest population possible.
# Analysis
The project’s graphic representation and the data it chose to represent itself give insight into how effective the project is as a reference for environmental justice. By organizing its data in points, this mapping project is assuming that the environmental impacts of these acts of violence are small or do not have a spatial footprint on the land surrounding said points. Upon cursory reflection one can readily confirm that say an oil well has a radius of daily air pollution and a potential spillage radius that would affect square kilometers and even volumes of space that cannot possibly be conveyed with a single point. Another concern I have is that the map is even-handed and broad in its definition of environmental conflicts. The issue with this broad coverage is that some conflicts like nuclear energy can be part of solutions against other conflicts like fossil fuel usage. Nuclear activities are indisputably environmental disruptors; but considering the challenges we face, with climate change and an already prevalent stigma against this clean-energy source, I think it is advisable that we do not further antagonize a source of energy that has more environmental pros than cons especially in comparison to most alternatives. 
I also found the map to be incomplete in its coverage of environmental violence points. Simply zooming into the San Francisco Bay Area, as a local, I was able to confirm that while the Chevron Richmond Refinery was included the map ignored 2 whole refineries (Phillips 66 San Francisco Refinery and the Shell Martinez Refinery) and a former one that was developed for residences in Hercules! The exclusion is concerning as refineries are high profile cases of environmental violence being heavy industry, these facilities have existed in the East Bay for decades, and the fact that these data points were missed when they are relatively easy to spot on Google Maps and are in well-researched country as wealthy as the US. This omission significantly impacts my confidence on the reliability and completeness of this atlas for less well-known and poorer locales of the world. 
# Conclusion 
Overall, the Environmental Justice Atlas is a good source of initial background and historical information on a broad level for conflicts it has labeled. However, its rough presentation, lack of more spatial graphic data beyond points, generalized definition on environmental justice, and grossly incomplete data set on environmental conflicts hamper its ability to be a truly useful and holistic reference for policy decisions and activism, especially at local scales, throughout the world.

# Project Brainstorm: Richmond’s Priority Neighborhoods for Environmental Justice

# Introduction
This mapping project hopes to be a local level intervention on environmental justice for the East Bay city of Richmond, CA. The project’s scope will be limited to Richmond to provide a historically underserved community with detailed cartography that has the potential to improve the city’s environment. It aims to provide a visually informative graphic that allows community leaders, activists, and policy makers to identify the physical urban areas in Richmond that suffer the most from environmental conflict. Moreover, the map would specify, akin to a diagnosis, the multimodal cocktail of environmental concerns for each neighborhood to help the city of Richmond define redevelopment priority neighborhoods to begin taking active steps to ameliorate environmental conflicts in these disadvantaged communities. The project defines Environmental Violence as any spatial characteristic of a city’s urban area as a man-made ecosystem that contributes to increased mental and physical health risks in its citizens. Conversely Environmental Justice refers to policy and infrastructure decisions made with the expressed goal to improve citizen health by altering the urban environment. 
# Factors and Metrics to Measure Environmental Violence
Time permitting, the project will focus its description of environmental violence via 3 factors ideally: Heavy Industry, Greenspace, and Transportation Infrastructure. Each factor will ideally be measured with 2 metrics for a total of 6 indicators of environmental violence. Heavy Industry is defined as any industrial activity that either negatively affects local AQI daily/during emergencies or causes health problems due to air pollution like lung cancer or asthma. Greenspace is defined as how accessible via walking are spaces with vegetation and how much tree cover exists in the city’s streets itself. Transportation Infrastructure is defined by the city’s street grid accessibility for active modes of transport (walking, biking, and public transit) to nodes of activity throughout the city and the noise pollution caused by traffic along such infrastructure. The plan is to implement each factor into the map one by one starting with Greenspace, Transportation Infrastructure, and then Heavy Industry because of the limited time available to construct the map.
# Data Collection Plan
The factors are ordered based on ease of data access. Park accessibility is measured with centroids defining a walkability radius around them based on walk score project precedents. There is local government data on Richmond Street coverage that can easily be inputted into the map. Transportation Infrastructure will be deemed to hinder active transport modes based on the number of street connections made impossible by the space it occupies. For instance, metro stations themselves are considered to increase accessibility in the adjacent neighborhood whereas elevated tracks between each can reduce ground transport accessibility. Noise pollution would simply be measured as any area that exceeds decibel levels typical of a residential area (>60dB) considering levels become hazardous at about 80dB. Noise pollution data would likely be kept in City website records or sources related to interstate highway system for freeway data. AQI information is a popular publicly available data set especially due to recent California wildfires. The city also has area data on the risks of chemical leaks in the event of a refinery emergency. Finally, the most difficult piece of information would be to find the distribution of cancer and asthma related health problems in Richmond as it would rely on the existence of a study or data collection tracking both variables (disease and address). This information is made further difficult to obtain because the private nature of this data reduces the likelihood and frequency it would be released.
# Differences From Similar Precedent Studies
This project in contrast to the Environmental Justice Atlas will plot area instead of points as its spatial data representation to better convey what geographical areas of the city are impacted by various form of environmental violence. Each shading of area will be cumulative with different overlapping areas being shaded in progressively darker tones to indicate spaces suffering multiple forms of environmental violence. Moreover, the data has been reduced to variables that specifically impact space and historical data is not the priority, this project’s priority is instead to identify current issues in efforts to enact future environmental justice. The data is also local specific so environmental justice issues such as water cleanliness that are of concern say in Flint, Michigan will not be mapped in this project. I also plan to make the map graphically appealing to read using a pink based color scheme to elicit empathy from readers rather than the realistic color scheme in the Environmental Justice Atlas.
# Conclusion
At minimum this project will achieve a map with the potential to guide development on expanding Richmond’s parks and urban forest as greenspace environmental justice, ideally it will be a multidimensional graphic indicating neighborhoods that should be the city’s priority for redevelopment. If successful, this mapping project could serve as a simple model and starting point for more multidimensional graphic approaches of environmental justice cartography for cities throughout the country. 
